---
title: "Journaling"
date: 2022-12-11
lastmod: 2022-12-11
project_tags: [ ]
status: "seeding"
weight: 1
summary: "Notes and examples on my journaling process"
---

I've been keeping a journal since late 2016, and have found it both helpful
and entertaining. I describe what I do as "bullet journal inspired", although
at this point, it's drifted pretty far from the original bullet journal ideas,
and I tend to focus more on memory and reflection than on organization.  For
2023, I'm trying to incorporate some more long form writing, and more
formalized review processes throughout the year.  

## My Favorite Spreads
### Paid Time Off Tracker

{{< imgproc "PTO tracker" Resize "700x" />}}

This is a key organizational tool for me. I find the official time tracker at
my job difficult to plan around, as it doesn't have an easy way to show me how
much time I will have available, factoring in future spent time for example.
So, having a tracker like this helps me to see at a glance how much time I
have available.

This is pretty simple to use. At the top, I fill in my available time, then I
enumerate the specific days below.  As I allocate time off, I fill in the days
I took, typically with a short note for what I took them off for.  Then I can
see at a glance how much time I have available for the rest of the year.

And yes, I am fortunate to have a lot of paid time off.

### Addresses and Postcards Sent

{{< imgproc "Addresses & Postcards" Resize "700x" />}}

This is a simple tracker, but I get a lot of use out of it. Rather than carry
a separate address book, I keep addresses for the people I mail the most in my
journal.  I also enjoy keeping track of how many postcards I send, and this is
one way I do that.  The right side of this spread tracks the days I send out a
batch of postcards to friends and family, and who specifically I sent the
cards to.

I like this setup for people who I mail regularly throughout the year, but it
doesn't really help for my card swaps
([postcrossing](https://www.postcrossing.com/user/NotNapoleon) & such).  I
don't have a tracker setup I love for this yet, and I'm experimenting with a
few things.  Currently, I have a monthly page where I keep a tally of which
countries I've sent cards to or received cards from that month.

### Pen Pal Tracker

{{< imgproc "Pen Pal Tracker" Resize "700x" />}}

Over the pandemic, I got into pen palling as a hobby, and I have half a dozen
people I correspond with somewhat regularly.  This spread helps me keep track
of them. I write down the date I last received a letter, and then the date I
sent my reply. Each box will get one pen pal, and if I pick up more people to
write to over the year, I may have to split some of the boxes in half.
There's no lack of space for tracking letters though.  I'll also write the
addresses for my pen pals in their boxes, so they're handy when I'm writing my
letters.

### Reading Log

{{< imgproc "Reading Log" Resize "700x" />}}

I read a lot of novels, and this is where I track them.  In addition to
keeping this global list of what I've read, I jot down each day what I'm
reading that day.  I find it interesting to look back on my entries and
remember what I was reading at the time.

I think most of my reading log is self explanatory, but the _source_ column is
kind of interesting.  Basically, this is where I got the book. I expect to
fill it in with things like "owned", "library", "humble bundle", or (in the
worst case) "amazon".

In previous years, I had a column for _Favorite Quote_, but I actually found
that made me want to fill it out less.  

### Hiking Log

{{< imgproc "Hiking Log" Resize "700x" />}}

This is new for 2023 in my journal, and inspired by this [post on
r/bujo](https://www.reddit.com/r/bujo/comments/wwnb31/completed_my_hiking_log_this_weekend/).
I'm not really sure if I'll get a lot out of this spread, but it's good to try
new things and see what happens with them.

### Monthly Main Page

{{< imgproc "Monthly" Resize "700x" />}}

The basic information I track here hasn't changed in many iterations of my
journal. The left side is for scheduling, and the right holds my intentions
and memories for the month.  I've slightly changed up the layout this year,
and the _accomplishments_ section is new.  

### Monthly Mood, Sleep, Symptoms and Self Care

{{< imgproc "Mood and Trackers" Resize "700x" />}}

I have my symptoms and self care on the left, and my sleep & mood on the
right.  Previous years, I've had the goals and highlights spread from above
swapped with the sleep tracker here, but I think it's better to have symptoms
and sleep on the same spread.

The columns on the symptom and self care side are: 
 - Anxiety
 - Depression
 - Exhausted
 - Trouble Sleeping
 - Zonked after work
 - Not engaged at work
 - IBS/Stomach issues
 - Headache
 - Sore Throat
 - Congestion
 - Coughing/Sneezing
 - Itchy eyes
 - Allergy meds
 - \# Drinks
 - Left my office for lunch
 - Walking/hiking
 - Yoga
 - Time outside
 - Writing/journaling
 - Screens off by 10

For this iteration, I simplified my mental health symptoms to focus more on
the specific things I'm trying to improve.  I'm likely over-indexing on
allergy symptoms still, which is probably less relevant since my treatment has
been working better.  I'm also not great at identifying self care activities
that actually help.  This is an ongoing issue, and the list above is my latest
attempt.

## How I Organize Goals
I do an annual goal setting exercise, in which I review the previous year's
goals and write an updated goals list for the new year. First, I set out a
theme for the year, which helps me focus my planning.  During the Covid-19
pandemic crisis, those themes tended to focus on just getting through the
year, but as we emerge into a less acute phase of the pandemic, I'm hoping to
have the mental space to focus on broader personal growth themes.

After setting a theme, I block out "big goals".  These are things I expect to
take many small actions to support throughout the year, and I try to list some
examples of those actions along with the goal.  I try not to have too many of
these, as it is easy to get overwhelmed, and then nothing gets done. A big
goal would be something like planned home improvement projects.

I then lay out some "small steps".  These are things that are important to me,
but are mostly one-and-done type tasks, or habits that don't require a lot of
planning. Small steps might be things like "check the 401k and rebalance if
necessary".

Finally, I include a "keep it up" section, for things I already have well
incorporated into my life.  I like to take some time to acknowledge and review
these things, and make sure I still want to have them in my life. 

When setting goals, I struggle with finding the right balance between
aspirational and achievable. For a long time, I made goals that didn't take
into account what I already knew I had to do, with reasoning something like
"well, I know I'm going to get to that anyway, my goals should be things I'm
reaching for".  I now believe that to be counter productive, and try to set
goals that acknowledge the reality of what I have going on.  This is not just
for the "keep it up" section, but also gets reflected in my big goals for the
year and monthly specific goals.

## End of Year Review
### By The Numbers
I do one page where I track my "stats" for the year.  What exactly gets
tracked varies a bit from year to year, but generally includes books read
(sometimes page counts if I tracked them), postcards and letters sent,
vacation and sick days used, and similar things.

### Major Events and Accomplishments
I also read back through the year and make note of any "major events", with a
date and a page reference.  Major events can include personal milestones
(e.g starting a new job), world events (e.g. the start of the pandemic), or
just dates I want to remember (e.g. a friend's wedding).  This serves as a
supplement to my table of contents, as I don't always recognize that an event
is something I'll want to find later when I'm first writing about it.

### Goals Review
I review my big goals for the year, and for each one I have four sections: How
did it go; what made this hard; what helped with this; and what are the next
steps.  For smaller goals, I just make a few notes on how it went.

### Quadrants
Finally, I do a four quadrant page with best of the year, worst of the year,
what to carry forward, and what to leave behind.
