---
title: "Why Are We Bad at Software Development"
date: 2023-09-05
lastmod: 2023-09-05
draft: true
garden_tags: [ ]
summary: " "
status: "seeding"
---
This is a bit of a "hot take" on the state of software engineering. 

Software engineering doesn't have any real professional
organizations to speak of. If you look at other engineering disciplines (like
Civil Engineering or Electrical Engineering), they have certifications that
aren't just glorified corporate marketing, professional standards and
licenses, etc. There are people who actually know what they're doing who vet
these things, unions that can stand up for not cutting corners, and laws
requiring a minimum level of quality. Software just doesn't have that
infrastructure.

I think a lot of that comes down to maturity. Software engineering is still
really new, comparatively speaking. In a lot of ways, we're still at the
intersection of "hobby" and "academic", without yet having melded into a real
engineering discipline. Computer Science degrees teach you how to prove the
complexity bound of an algorithm in isolation, and boot camps teach you how to
bang together the equivalent of a tree-house for the web. Both of which are
fine things to learn, but aren't really the foundation of solid engineering.

Then you combine that with a frankly stupid amount of VC money, which is
ultimately a glorified get rich(er) quick scheme, and you get what we have
today. The business side doesn't care about quality because there's no
consequences for it (Equifax is doing just fine, for example), and the folks
who do care don't have any power, because we don't have any organization.

How do we fix it? I haven't a clue. I think unions might be a good first step,
but that's a hard sell for a profession that skews very libertarian.
Regulation might help too, but I don't really think the US at least as anyone
in power who understands the problem enough to even start. Hopefully, that
gets better over time, but I wouldn't expect it to quickly.

A lot of thinkers who defined this generation have a decidedly libertarian
bent, like RMS. The GPL in particular is emphatic that any restrictions on use
(other than copy-left) are against both the letter and the spirit of the
license, which seems very libertarian to me. The idea of the "software
meritocracy" is also quite libertarian.

There are whole branches of our field that are deeply and inherently
libertarian, for example the whole crypto-currency world, which is built on a
philosophical distrust of centralized banking and regulation. The core ideas
behind the internet also, I would say - a fundamentally decentralized protocol
in which anyone can participate as an equal. At least, in theory. Needless to
say, both of these examples have fallen somewhat short of their ambitions.


